one thing that is crucial when composing a shader of multiple parts is that you
correctly layer them together using mosques and
that concerns all the individual PBR maps.
Important for this is that you know
how to handle combining and manipulating mosques,
which is something I talked about in
the previous chapter about texture composition.
But we will also touch on this again in this video.
In this part,
I want to go over what is important to consider when composing a shader out
of multiple elements and how to set the shader up for a dynamic masking workflow.
For that reason I adapted the example seen again
by removing some of the plaster on the wall,
exposing a wooden structure beneath it and adding puddles of water to the floor.
I want to just quickly reiterate some of the more
important things to keep in mind for working with masks
to receive a simple black and white mosque with a sharp edge
to mix without a transition from a value map,
you can simply use a math node set to great than or less than
alternatively to generate their mask with a transition.
You can use for example a map range node
with that. You can select start and end points of the mosque
and also choose a different interpolation type to get an even smoother transition.
The transition is something important to think about because
a lot of the time blending to materials in
a convincing way is not just a matter of
transitioning between two shakers with a single mosque.
Very important when layering together multiple materials in a shader is
to take care of blending the individual PBR maps correctly.
You can simply use multiple principle be sdf shader nodes and blend
between them using a mix trader note with a mask texture,
but a lot of the time.
That is not the best way of doing this.
One reason why blending the individual PBR maps is usually better
is that it will increase the performance of the shader as
only one main principle is the f shader note is used
that makes the shader easier for the render engine to process.
Another reason is simply that I can look different as what
happens while blending the materials is a fundamentally different process.
The thing with blending together materials is that they usually don't really
just fade one into the other like they are separate materials.
That of course it depends on the use case,
but let's take a look at a change in wetness. For example,
in the previous chapter I showed you the example of a melting
Suzanne head using dynamic paint that what's the floor and the carpet
In that example the water forms a puddle on the
floor that has a sharp transition between wet and dry.
But on the carpet, the fibers are gradually soaked in the water.
And in that example the difference in the individual methods of
blending either whole shade ear's or individual maps is quite noticeable.
The reason for that is that blending the whole shakers simply blends between
a shaded with a glossy surface and one with a rough surface.
Whereas blending the maps results in a gradual change of the roughness,
making the blended result look much more natural.
This phenomenon is the shading equivalent of blending a blurred
with a sharp image versus gradually increasing the blurring radius.
With one method,
you can clearly see that the transition is simply a mixture of
two separate images and the other one looks much more natural and appealing
but simply using a mix shader node is much
more convenient and keeps the notary much better organized.
So blending between multiple shader is like that is one of these small noting sins.
You can allow yourself when the context allows it and you don't rely on it too often
in this example,
I am using this technique to blend between the plastic
material of the wall and the underlying wooden structure.
The reason that I do that here is that
I have a sharp edge between the materials anyways
And it gives me a very useful visual differentiation
between the two material layers of the Shader.
I don't use this method to mix the individual
elements of the structure to mix between the word,
the background and the bolts.
There, I mix the individual PBR maps,
you can also use the information that you gain from
your PBR maps to generate masks for layering materials.
For example, the height map has a high structural relevance for the material
and as such,
it oftentimes makes a lot of sense to use this
map to mix together materials based on their height.
A classic example of this is adding puddles of water to a ground plane
That's just for demonstration,
grab the floor from the example scene and
create some paddles based on the height map.
The wooden boards here are bent and tilted,
which gives some variation the height already.
But I want to go one step further by adding
a noise texture and offsetting the height map by that.
That gives us a very nice overall way venous to form the palace from
then we can simply grab a math note set to less than two Moscow,
all the areas that are below a certain level.
I'll just make that level a separate value note so we can control it later.
And this mosque can then be nicely used to mix in a wet surface to the shader.
To do that. Now the mosque has to be incorporated into all the relevant PBR maps.
Those are most importantly for the paddles, the roughness and the height map,
but also the color map has to be adjusted as well
as the layer of dust on the edges of the room.
Let's just start with adapting the color first.
I want the wet areas to appear darker to reflect
the energy conservation effect of surface is covered in water.
So I simply use a mix RGB note and started to multiply
when I now plugged the mask texture into the factory input.
I can't control the darkening of only the wet areas with the second color input.
Next, most importantly, the roughness of the shader has to be adjusted
as the roughness map is a value map
here instead of the mix. RGB note, I am using the map range note
with that. I can simply blend the roughness value of the wet areas into the map
to remove the mixed industrial later from any wet areas.
I simply subtract the mask of the wet areas from the dust mask
but I have to make sure to clamp the resulting values between zero and one.
So the mask does not have any negative values which can create some weird artifacts.
And lastly, I have to integrate the water level into the height map. To do that.
I simply use a maximum operation between the height map of the floorboards
and the water level to trim away any areas below that level.
And now you can see that the distribution of
the water accurately takes into account the height map.
Let me just crank up the scale of displacement
and tilt these boards by a ridiculous amount.
So we can see how it works.
And if we now just get rid of the displacement
and look at the floor in the material preview.
You can see that still works in the same way
in this sense,
a height map can even be useful if you
are not planning to use it for actual displacement,
but simply to mix between materials based on the material's properties.
That is great to get a convincing result of mixing to surface types.
You can see that this way we have, for example,
some floorboards peeking out of the puddles with an adjustable water level rather
than just using the nice texture its own to mix between the materials.
The method I showed you is obviously much more accurate
as it respects the actual context of the height information
in that same senses with the height map,
you can also use all sorts of other texture maps
to guide the mask that you're using for blending materials.
That can be incredibly useful to automatically adapt a very
simple mask like that noise texture that we used in
a way that makes sense in the context of the
material for the layering of the world for example,
I incorporated the structure of the wooden
bars into the distribution of the plaster.
The basic mask itself is very simple and it looks
like this and using some base texture of the shader,
it is adapted to look like this
to be able to influence a mask like that.
Something that I mentioned a while back about shape control.
Place another role again,
you want to be able to work with gradual information on your base textures.
If you are left with a simple black and white mask with a sharp edge.
there is not much you can do in terms of influencing
the shape of the edge by using a guy texture on top
what you want to have for that is a gradual transition instead of a sharp edge.
So you also have the information of the shape on the inside on the outside of the edge.
You can still turn this gradient into a sharp mosque afterwards.
There is also what I'm doing in this example but the important part is that
you apply the texture that guides the mask before that great information is lost.
To have an influence on the shape of the mask.
How you apply the guide texture depends on the use case but in most cases you will want
to either use it in a map range note or add it on top of the mask.
If I just do that here and look at the resulting mask
Again while subtracting 0.5 and multiplying by a
factor to get control over the strength.
You can see that the noise nicely influences the shape of the mask.
How that works.
Is essentially that the guide texture prioritizes certain parts
to influence how the basic mask is applied.
And so combining based textures from the material with the mosque is a very
powerful way to guide the mask in a sensible way with the material.
So let's talk about the way I am generating the base mask in this example
you can of course just use some procedural texture like for example
a noise texture or even a simple gradient to generate the base mosque
or any texture really.
But here I want to introduce you to a way to actually add a manual control at this point
an incredibly useful workflow for blending together multiple materials is using
vertex colors to paint a mosque directly on the geometry.
Vertex colors are a type of vertex data that
stores an RGB color per vertex to the mesh.
And that way you can very easily paint a color map
onto the mesh itself without using image textures and UV.
Unwrapping
vertex colors can easily be accessed in the shader
notes as well to incorporate them in a shader.
I have shown vertex colors before and they're used together with dynamic paint to
make a shader interact with the proximity of other objects in the previous chapter.
Because of the fact that a vertex color only stores
one color per vertex depending on the mesh density.
That can turn out in a very low resolution and for that reason it
is usually ineffective to use them to paint and surface detail or sharp mosques.
If you must contains rather smooth gradients
though and large differences in detail distribution.
They can be much more efficient than using image textures
with the broken down wall.
You can see the vertex color workflow in action and how powerful
it is that I can simply paint in a rough mask of where
the plaster should be ripped off the wall without having to worry about
the structural detail which is taken care of by the shader itself.
The various color map that I am painting is a
simple black and white mosque without any particular detail.
The black areas will be the parts with missing plaster
with black as foreground color and white as background colour is selected.
I can simply paint away the plaster and when
pressing control I can paint it back in again.
This is where the true power of procedural masking really comes into play
when you are painting in a mosque like this.
You don't have to use this mask directly
to blend between the different materials that either gives
you a very artificial look and does not follow
any natural way of blending two materials together.
Or it requires you to manually paint the mosque with a lot of detail
Instead you can use the information about the material that you have in your no
tree to guide the mask and combine the different materials in a natural way.
As I mentioned before,
you get very easy control over the general distribution of the mosque.
The detail is handled automatically by the shader which can turn
it into an incredibly powerful and easy to use tool.
You can of course also use image texture painting for
this exact same workflow just as a quick tip.
You can even use the individual RGB channels of the vertex color
separately to control different masks with a single vertex color layer.
That is more efficient, but it comes at the cost of less convenient usage.
This more advanced war shader, which is controllable with vertex color,
is actually the subject of this chapter's work.
For example.
There you will see how to create the whole shader,
including the underlying bone structure,
and I go over the vertex colors set up again with a bit more time.
So if you want to see that head over to the work for examples, to check it out
either now or after watching the remaining videos of this chapter.